Unboxed-Numerics.md, before:

## Summary

Examples use `Int`, but equally holds for `Word`.

### GHC before 9.2

#### Data types
```haskell
data Int8 = I8 Int#
data Int16 = I16 Int#
data Int32 = I32 Int#

#if WORD_SIZE_IN_BITS == 64
data Int64 = I64 Int#
#else
data Int64 = I64 Int64#
#endif
```

#### Numeric ops
- `Int8#` some, not used by boxed
- `Int16#` some, not used by boxed
- `Int32#` none
- `Int64#` complete when `WORD_SIZE_IN_BITS /= 64`, none otherwise

#### Array ops
```haskell
indexInt<N>OffAddr# :: Addr# -> Int# -> Int#
readInt<N>OffAddr# :: Addr# -> Int# -> State# s -> (# State# s, Int# #)
writeInt<N>OffAddr# :: Addr# -> Int# -> Int# -> State# s -> State# s
-- ...
```

### GHC HEAD as of 2021-02-17

#### Data types
```haskell
data Int8 = I8 Int8#
data Int16 = I16 Int16#
data Int32 = I32 Int32#

#if WORD_SIZE_IN_BITS == 64
data Int64 = I64 Int#
#else
data Int64 = I64 Int64#
#endif
```

#### Numeric ops
- `Int8#` complete, not used by boxed
- `Int16#` complete, not used by boxed
- `Int32#` complete, not used by boxed
- `Int64#` complete when `WORD_SIZE_IN_BITS /= 64`, none otherwise

#### Array ops
Same as before

### GHC 9.2 goal

#### Data types
```haskell
data Int8 = I8 Int8#
data Int16 = I16 Int16#
data Int32 = I32 Int32#
data Int64 = I64 Int64#
```

#### Array ops
```haskell
indexInt<N>OffAddr# :: Addr# -> Int# -> Int<N>#
readInt<N>OffAddr# :: Addr# -> Int# -> State# s -> (# State# s, Int<N># #)
writeInt<N>OffAddr# :: Addr# -> Int# -> Int<N># -> State# s -> State# s
-- ...
```

#### Numeric ops
- `Int8#` complete, used by boxed
- `Int16#` complete, used by boxed
- `Int32#` complete, used by boxed
- `Int64#` complete, used by boxed

## How we got here

1. Old discussion about `Int64#` TODO fill in.

   - #11953: Export Word32#, Word64# on all architectures

     Maybe this is the oldest issue here; some conversation.

   - #16964: Documentation of RuntimeRep is wrong about 64-bit integer reps

     This are the issue with the most conversation.
     The main point of contention was not whether we should more faithfully represent the fixed-sized options, which everyone seemed to agree with, but whether the native options should be nominally distinct or aliases:

       - `Int` should be distinct from `Int<N>` for back compat.
       - `Int#` could be an alias of `Int<N>#` (for some `N`).
       - `IntRep` could be an alias of `Int<N>Rep` (for some `N`).

     The most conservative option for now is to keep everything nominally distinct.

   - From #16964, two follow-up issues made to track specific issues with no conversation yet:

     - #17377: Int64#/Word64# are defined on all platforms, but some of the operations are only available on 32-bit

     - #17375: Int64# is exported on 64-bit systems (probably unintentionally), but you can't do anything with it.

2. Aarch64 NGC needed the boxed types changed.

   1. problem stated: https://mail.haskell.org/pipermail/ghc-devs/2020-October/019317.html

   2. (later in thread) solution agreed upon: https://mail.haskell.org/pipermail/ghc-devs/2020-October/019332.html. In short, `Int<N>` *must* wrap `Int<N>#` for various FFI to work properly. 

   3. (side note) @Ericson2314 points out this dovetails nicely with earlier plans: https://mail.haskell.org/pipermail/ghc-devs/2020-October/019333.html

   4. https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/commit/be5d74caab64abf9d986fc7290f62731db7e73e7 so changes sized types. Submodules are bumped, but changes to submodules were not merged to their master branches yet.

3. https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/19026 opened to track doing the rest.

   - TODO find comment where @RyanGlScott pointed out that array primops no longer agreeing with boxed wrapper type constructors was causing pain.

## Issues being addressed

- The new systems is much simpler and more symmetric, being easier to learn. It also matches expectations for users coming from C since C99, and Rust. Overall, the wider programming community seems to agree retrofitting fixed-sized numerics on top of native ones was a historical convenience that lived far too long.

- Sized standard (boxed) Haskell types, especially via their `Foreign.C.Types` newtypes, not corresponding to sized C-- types broke FFI on Aarch64.

- `Int64#` requires copious CPP to use correctly portably across 64-bit and 32-bit platforms. The CPP is pure cruft as there is no difference in *intent* just the *mechanism* by which that attempt is accomplished.

- The `Int8#` and `Int16#` primops better express the intent to the backend, allowing perhaps faster numeric code (e.g. between autovectorization in LLVM and OOM magic on the CPU itself).

- The `Int8#` and `Int16#` primops by *not* being used by their boxed type counterparts are somewhat under-tested.

- The implementation of the dissapearing `Int64#` primops is the final remaining single-target assumption baked into the GHC binary. Otherwise GHC is is entirely multi-target as controlled by the configuration files and CLI flags.

Commit message:

Add conversion primop outline to unboxed numerics

Unboxed-Numerics.md, after:

## Summary

Examples use `Int`, but equally holds for `Word`.

### GHC before 9.2

#### Data types
```haskell
data Int8 = I8 Int#
data Int16 = I16 Int#
data Int32 = I32 Int#

#if WORD_SIZE_IN_BITS == 64
data Int64 = I64 Int#
#else
data Int64 = I64 Int64#
#endif
```

#### Numeric ops
- `Int8#` some, not used by boxed
- `Int16#` some, not used by boxed
- `Int32#` none
- `Int64#` complete when `WORD_SIZE_IN_BITS /= 64`, none otherwise

#### Array ops
```haskell
indexInt<N>OffAddr# :: Addr# -> Int# -> Int#
readInt<N>OffAddr# :: Addr# -> Int# -> State# s -> (# State# s, Int# #)
writeInt<N>OffAddr# :: Addr# -> Int# -> Int# -> State# s -> State# s
-- ...
```

#### Conversion ops
`N` is restricted to be 8 and 16:
```haskell
extendInt<N> :: Int<N># -> Int#
NarrowInt<N> :: Int# -> Int<N>#
```

### GHC HEAD as of 2021-02-17

#### Data types
```haskell
data Int8 = I8 Int8#
data Int16 = I16 Int16#
data Int32 = I32 Int32#

#if WORD_SIZE_IN_BITS == 64
data Int64 = I64 Int#
#else
data Int64 = I64 Int64#
#endif
```

#### Numeric ops
- `Int8#` complete, not used by boxed
- `Int16#` complete, not used by boxed
- `Int32#` complete, not used by boxed
- `Int64#` complete when `WORD_SIZE_IN_BITS /= 64`, none otherwise

#### Array ops
Same as before

#### Conversion ops
Same as before, but `N` can also be 32.

### GHC 9.2 goal

#### Data types
```haskell
data Int8 = I8 Int8#
data Int16 = I16 Int16#
data Int32 = I32 Int32#
data Int64 = I64 Int64#
```

#### Numeric ops
- `Int8#` complete, used by boxed
- `Int16#` complete, used by boxed
- `Int32#` complete, used by boxed
- `Int64#` complete, used by boxed

#### Array ops
```haskell
indexInt<N>OffAddr# :: Addr# -> Int# -> Int<N>#
readInt<N>OffAddr# :: Addr# -> Int# -> State# s -> (# State# s, Int<N># #)
writeInt<N>OffAddr# :: Addr# -> Int# -> Int<N># -> State# s -> State# s
-- ...
```

#### Conversion ops
```haskell
int<N>ToInt :: Int<N># -> Int#
intToInt<N> :: Int# -> Int<N>#
```
(`N` is not restricted, all of 8, 16, 32, and 64 are supported.)

## How we got here

1. Old discussion about `Int64#` TODO fill in.

   - #11953: Export Word32#, Word64# on all architectures

     Maybe this is the oldest issue here; some conversation.

   - #16964: Documentation of RuntimeRep is wrong about 64-bit integer reps

     This are the issue with the most conversation.
     The main point of contention was not whether we should more faithfully represent the fixed-sized options, which everyone seemed to agree with, but whether the native options should be nominally distinct or aliases:

       - `Int` should be distinct from `Int<N>` for back compat.
       - `Int#` could be an alias of `Int<N>#` (for some `N`).
       - `IntRep` could be an alias of `Int<N>Rep` (for some `N`).

     The most conservative option for now is to keep everything nominally distinct.

   - From #16964, two follow-up issues made to track specific issues with no conversation yet:

     - #17377: Int64#/Word64# are defined on all platforms, but some of the operations are only available on 32-bit

     - #17375: Int64# is exported on 64-bit systems (probably unintentionally), but you can't do anything with it.

2. Aarch64 NGC needed the boxed types changed.

   1. problem stated: https://mail.haskell.org/pipermail/ghc-devs/2020-October/019317.html

   2. (later in thread) solution agreed upon: https://mail.haskell.org/pipermail/ghc-devs/2020-October/019332.html. In short, `Int<N>` *must* wrap `Int<N>#` for various FFI to work properly. 

   3. (side note) @Ericson2314 points out this dovetails nicely with earlier plans: https://mail.haskell.org/pipermail/ghc-devs/2020-October/019333.html

   4. https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/commit/be5d74caab64abf9d986fc7290f62731db7e73e7 so changes sized types. Submodules are bumped, but changes to submodules were not merged to their master branches yet.

3. https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/19026 opened to track doing the rest.

   - TODO find comment where @RyanGlScott pointed out that array primops no longer agreeing with boxed wrapper type constructors was causing pain.

## Issues being addressed

- The new systems is much simpler and more symmetric, being easier to learn. It also matches expectations for users coming from C since C99, and Rust. Overall, the wider programming community seems to agree retrofitting fixed-sized numerics on top of native ones was a historical convenience that lived far too long.

- Sized standard (boxed) Haskell types, especially via their `Foreign.C.Types` newtypes, not corresponding to sized C-- types broke FFI on Aarch64.

- `Int64#` requires copious CPP to use correctly portably across 64-bit and 32-bit platforms. The CPP is pure cruft as there is no difference in *intent* just the *mechanism* by which that attempt is accomplished.

- The `Int8#` and `Int16#` primops better express the intent to the backend, allowing perhaps faster numeric code (e.g. between autovectorization in LLVM and OOM magic on the CPU itself).

- The `Int8#` and `Int16#` primops by *not* being used by their boxed type counterparts are somewhat under-tested.

- The implementation of the dissapearing `Int64#` primops is the final remaining single-target assumption baked into the GHC binary. Otherwise GHC is is entirely multi-target as controlled by the configuration files and CLI flags.
